headline: Headlines are great, sometimes they're super long like this one let's see maybe edit your stuff better
In 1958, researchers from the University of Louisville and the Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission gathered at a lock on the Monongahela River for routine collecting, counting and comparing of fish species.
At the time, the best way to accomplish this was what’s called lock chamber sampling, or filling a 350-by-56-foot lock with river water, injecting it with cyanide and waiting for the dead fish to float to the top. Archaic, but effective.
On this particular day, researchers opened the chamber to find one fish inside.
One fish
It shouldn’t have been surprising, says Jerry Shulte, a biologist who managed ORSANCO’s source water protection and emergency response team for more than two decades. After all, the steel companies that dotted the region’s riverbanks were dumping their contaminated water right into the rivers. The waterways were so acidic that the steel-hulled boats meant to have a lifespan of 20 years rusted out in three and the pH routinely measured less than 4.
“That’s vinegar,” Shulte says. “It was so polluted, you could see it, smell it and taste it.”
By the time Shulte began monitoring fish species in the 1990s, thanks to environmental and industrial regulations like the Clean Water Act, the Ohio River and its major tributaries, including the Mon, had changed. They no longer looked or smelled like open sewers, mayflies hatched on their surfaces, many pollution-intolerant aquatic species returned, and lock chamber sampling — done without cyanide — could yield hundreds, even thousands, of fish.
“It’s a functioning ecosystem now,” Shulte says.
Functioning doesn’t mean perfect, however. As recently as 2015, the Environmental Protection Agency named the Ohio River one of the country’s most polluted. Industrial contaminants, including the “forever chemical” perfluorooctanoic acid, have been detected on a long stretches of the river and toxic algal blooms erupt when conditions are just right. Still, most of the time, the majority of the river’s 981 miles are ripe for recreation and fit for drinking after proper treatment.
The same can’t always be said for the watershed.
"At vero eos et accusamus et iusto odio dignissimos ducimus qui blanditiis praesentium voluptatum deleniti atque corrupti quos dolores et quas molestias excepturi sint occaecati cupiditate non provident."
The Ohio River drainage basin is an interconnected web of small rivers and creeks covering 205,000 square miles of largely rural, Applachian landscape and is home to 25 million people, many of whom are among the country’s poorest.
In parts of the basin, acid mine drainage turns creeks the color of Orange Crush, agricultural runoff chokes streams with nutrients, and combined sewage and storm water pipe overflows fill waterways with dangerous bacteria.
Watershed pollution in Appalachia, much of which has been caused by coal mining, is an ongoing environmental hazard that mimics the threat steel once once posed to big cities on the Ohio, threatening aquatic life, making recreation dangerous and — perhaps most critically — creating water unfit for human consumption.
It started with a slurry BarbiAnn Maynard stands on the porch of her home in Huntleyville, Kentuckyy., population 188, and points across the two-lane road, where three houses perch on a tree-speckled mountainside. “That one — dementia. This one — dementia. That one over there — dementia. My dad — dementia,” she says. “You can’t tell me that’s not because of the water.” On Oct. 11, 2000, 300 million gallons of coal slurry broke through a reservoir in Martin County, Kentucky, flooding the abandoned mine shafts below and rushing out into the waters of Wolf Creek and Coldwater Fork.
The black custard coated and killed everything in its path as it slithered for hundreds of miles and shifted into adjoining waterways, including the Tug Fork, Big Sandy and Ohio Rrivers. In Martin County, sludge crept into yards and across roads, creating pools five feet deep.
“It was like mud pie,” says Maynard, “only instead of mud and water, it was mud and oil.”
The slurry was an unprecedented disaster — 30 times larger than the Exxon Valdez oil spill more than a decade earlier — wiping out aquatic life in the creeks and cutting off drinking water to nearly 30,000 people.